Micronutrient malnutrition is an emerging public health concern globally. It affects people of all ages and socioeconomic groups; however, the most marginalized are the worst affected. Using data from the Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey 2016–18, we determined the magnitude of deficiencies (of iron, zinc, vitamin A, folate, vitamins B12 and D) among children and adolescents (1–19 years of age) living in four metropolitan cities of India. Separate estimates by residence in slum and non-slum areas were derived for pre-school and school-aged children and adolescents. The association between each micronutrient deficiency (MND) and place of residence, exposure to progarmmes, socioeconomic, and demographic variables was assessed using Poisson regression. Of all children in the sample, at least seven out of 10 children suffered from some kind of MND. Anaemia was prevalent among all children but at different levels among various age-groups. Folate deficiency was highly prevalent among children in slums whereas deficiencies of vitamin D and zinc were more prevalent among non-slum children. Dietary diversity reduced the risk of deficiencies- Vitamin A in children 1–9, anaemea in 1–4 age, folate in children 5–19. Exposure to government-sponsored nutrition programmes such as mid-day meal, and IFA did not show any significant effect on reducing deficiencies. However, adolescents exposed to IFA supplementation programmes were less likely to be folate deficient. Overall, government schemes that have been running for decades, and intensified lately, are yet to show noticeable positive effect on micronutrient status of children. Nevertheless, differential estimates by slum/non-slum residence and by age-groups calls for devising different strategies for different sub-groups to address the issue of MNDs among children and adolescents. Nutrition education not only for slum residents but also for those from non-slum areas is an urgent need to check the spread of MNDs.

Introduction
Micronutrient deficiencies (MNDs) are common worldwide and increasingly recognized as a serious public health issue. MNDs substantially contribute to the existing disease burden (Wieser et al., 2013). Adverse health effects of MNDs may range from severe birth defects to chronic diseases. The increased morbidity, mortality and disability resulting from MNDs lead to productivity loss. Stein and Qaim (2007) projected that the cost of MNDs alone is 0.8–2.5% of India's gross domestic product. Ensuring that its children and adolescents are not only healthy today, but that they grow up into healthy adults who will in turn, have families of good health (Mukherjee et al., 2020), is the key to fully capitalizing on the demographic dividend.

Malnutrition, whether macronutrient or micronutrient deficiency, indiscriminately affects the most marginalized population, the urban poor forming a sizeable chunk. With its explosive growth of cities, India's urban population is expected to increase from 31% in 2011 to 39% in 2036 (National Commission on Population, 2019). Cities like Mumbai and New Delhi are already supporting a slum population as large as 50% of their total population. The fast pace of urbanization poses a significant risk to the health of the urban poor resulting from multidimensional poverty – the range of different disadvantages they experience as elaborated by Oxford Poverty & Human Development Initiative (OPHI, n.d.). The most vulnerable in these urban slums are the children where ‘the “urban advantage” in terms of greater socio-economic infrastructure eludes poor children and reduces their chances of pursuing healthy and economically productive futures’ (Dasra, n.d.).

It is estimated that more than two billion people in the world suffer from MNDs (FAO, 2013), with a large proportion living in India (Ritchie et al., 2018). Prior national-level surveys, as well as independent research studies, have assessed the prevalence of MNDs resulting from a single micronutrient - mainly iron; iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency among all age-groups and is prevalent across all social strata (Koshy et al., 2020; Laxmaiah et al., 2013). The Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS) 2016-18 brought to the fore the country-wide prevalence of MNDs – more specifically deficiencies of iron, zinc vitamin A, folate, vitamins B12 and D and iodine – among children and adolescents in India. The CNNS estimated that the prevalence of anemia in children aged 1–4 years (pre-schoolers), 5–9 years (school-aged children) and 10–19 years (adolescents) was 41%, 24% and 28%, respectively. Iron deficiency among children and adolescents varied between 17% and 32%, being the highest for pre-schoolers (1–4 years) and the lowest for school-aged children (5–9 years) ( MoHFW, UNICEF and Population Council, 2019).

The deficiencies of iron, vitamin A and zinc are among the most common MNDs globally (Han et al., 2022; Mwanga et al., 2021; Bailey et al., 2015). Vitamin A deficiency remains prevalent in south Asia (44%) and sub-Saharan Africa (48%), affecting one-third of children aged 6–59 months in 2013 (UNICEF, 2019). In India, the prevalence of Vitamin A deficiency ranges from 16% to 22% among children and adolescents (MoHFW, UNICEF and Population Council, 2019). The prevalence of zinc deficiency in India at the national level has not been previously estimated; however, predictions based on regional studies indicate that zinc deficiency could be widespread in children under five years of age (Kapil and Jain, 2011) and adolescents (Kapil et al., 2011; Kawade, 2012) The CNNS estimates based on biochemical measures revealed that children in all age groups were zinc deficient, the prevalence being 19% among pre-schoolers, 17% among school-aged children and 32% among adolescents (MoHFW, UNICEF and Population Council, 2019).

Explicit research on deficiencies of micronutrients such as folate, vitamin B12 and vitamin D began only in the last 20 years. Systematic reviews on vitamin D deficiency in India and other low middle-income countries (LMICs) came up with different estimates of prevalence rates among various sub-groups of the population (Cashman et al., 2018; Jeyakumar and Shinde, 2019; Ritu and Gupta, 2014), but all of them concluded that vitamin D deficiency prevailed in epidemic proportion. According to the CNNS 2016–18, 14% of pre-schoolers, 18% of school-aged children and 24% of adolescents were Vitamin D deficient (MoHFW, UNICEF and Population Council, 2019). Unlike America and Europe where inadequate levels of vitamin B12 is uncommon in the young population (Iglesia et al., 2012), it is highly prevalent among children in Africa (Siekmann et al., 2003; Wegmüller et al., 2020) and Asia (Chakraborty et al., 2018; Kapil and Sareen, 2014) and this was further confirmed from the findings from CNNS (MoHFW, UNICEF and Population Council, 2019).

As stated earlier, anemia is widespread in India and deficiencies of folate, iron and vitamin B12 are the major causes of nutritional anemia. Studies in various parts of the developing world have documented the prevalence of folate deficiency among children (Bhandari and Banjara, 2014; Herrador et al., 2014; Hettiarachchi et al., 2006; Korkalo et al., 2015). A recent study carried out by Kapil and Bhadouria (2020) in Delhi estimated the prevalence of folate deficiency to be between 22% and 52% for adolescents from various socioeconomic groups. Folate deficiency among children at the national level in India was estimated at 23%, 28% and 37% among pre-schoolers, school-aged children and adolescents, respectively (MoHFW, UNICEF and Population Council, 2019). The CNNS highlights the gravity of the problem arising out of inadequacy of folate, vitamin B12 and vitamin D that we have begun to recognize only recently. Iodine deficiency and its manifestations have been known to mankind from ancient times. India was one of the first countries in the world to start a public health programme to address iodine deficiency disorders based on salt iodization, and its success is reflected in the adequacy of iodine levels among children and adolescents in the country (MoHFW, UNICEF and Population Council, 2019).

Although each micronutrient has been individually discussed, multiple micronutrient malnutrition often co-exists (Bailey et al., 2015; Houghton et al., 2019). Houghton et al. (2019) found that multiple micronutrient deficiencies (MMDs) were common among children aged 12–23 months; over half the children lacked adequate levels of three or more micronutrients, and one in 10 children were classified with the adequate status of all micronutrients measured.

MNDs may affect individuals at any stage of life; nevertheless, pregnant women, lactating mothers, children and adolescents are the most vulnerable groups. Overall, MNDs occur due to insufficient intake of nutrient-rich food or sufficient intake combined with impaired absorption due to infection, disease, or inflammation (Bailey et al., 2015). Preschoolers and children are highly vulnerable to MNDs as they have low body stores of micronutrients, they may have low intake due to improper feeding practices and increased losses due to concurrent infections (Haimi and Lerner, 2014). Adolescents too, are nutritionally vulnerable as they tend to follow trends and modern lifestyle circumstances that might question healthy nutrition (Biesalski and Jana, 2018). The nutritional and physiological stresses of pregnancy and lactation increase the risk of MNDs among adolescent girls. The underlying factors that contribute to the immediate causes of MNDs include food insecurity, inadequate care or feeding practices, unhealthy environment with inadequate access to health services (Bailey et al., 2015).

The Government of India's (GOI) focus on nutrition programmes has been increased after launching Poshan Abhiyan, a Government flagship programme. The focused programmes on deficiencies, such as Anemia Mukt Bharat (Anemia free India)-intensified ion-plus initiative, is a further required step to deal a persistently higher prevalence of anemia in the country. Severe anemia, vitamin A and Vitamin D, Iodine, and acute malnutrition are among the deficiencies targeted in the Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakaram (RBSK), another flagship programme of the GOI. RBSK is targeting affected children 0–18 through the Anganwadi Centre, Government, and Government aided schools. Therefore, it is also pertinent to understand the pattern of MNDs by the available information on the government programmes such as deworming tablets, iron folic acid (IFA) tablets and mid-day meals given at Anganwadi Centers and schools. Further, as these schemes are more intensified in urban slums, it becomes imperative to understand the MNDs patterns in slums areas.

Prior studies on MNDs, particularly in India are limited and concentrated on anemia and iron deficiency among children under five years of age and women of reproductive age. Studies pertaining to children covering all age-groups, from birth until adolescence, are few. Socio-economic status, geographical inequalities, gender, and rural-urban differentials are well-identified correlates of MNDs. Although these MNDs are widespread in the Indian population, we have no evidence that the prevalence of MNDs in metropolitan cities (Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai) would differ from the overall prevalence. However, children and adolescents who live in metro cities which have dense and heterogeneous populations may have different level of MNDs than rural or other cities. The high risk of some of the MNDs among them is expected with the increasing consumption of fried and junk foods. The comparative studies investigating differences in MNDs between slum and non-slum populations are almost negligible in India. To our knowledge, none have estimated the prevalence of deficiencies due to multiple micronutrients among children and adolescents by place of residence combined with poverty, that is, urban and slum strata. Therefore, the present study aims to estimate the magnitude of MNDs and their correlates among pre-school children (1–4 years), school-aged children (5–9 years) and adolescents (10–19 years) living in four metropolitan cities of India – Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai, disaggregated by slums and non-slums. The study further examined the linkages of age-specific ICDS and IFA programme exposure and diets with different MNDs in slum areas.

