Nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency-associated Infantile epileptic spasms syndrome: Clinico-neurophysiological presentation, response to treatment, and neurodevelopmental outcome

Nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency has been shown to cause Infantile epileptic spasms syndrome (IESS) in infants in anecdotal studies.
Methods
In this retrospective cohort study, we intended to study the clinical presentation, neurophysiological, laboratory abnormalities, treatment, and neurodevelopmental outcome at 6-months in infants presenting with IESS secondary to nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency (NVBD) and to compare these variables from the rest of the infants with IESS without vitamin B12 deficiency. We included only spasm-free cases or those who showed at least a 50% reduction in spasm frequency on D7 after starting oral/parenteral vitamin B12. We used well-validated measurement tools like the Developmental Assessment Scale for Indian Infants (DASII), Child Feeding Index (CFI), Burden of amplitudes and epileptiform discharges (BASED) score, countable Hypsarrhythmia paroxysm index (cHPI), durational Hypsarrhythmia paroxysm index (dHPI), and Early childhood epilepsy severity scale (E-CHESS) score for documenting these variables.
Results
Data from 162 infants with IESS (21 caused by NVBD) were included in our study. The NVBD group had more patients residing in the rural region, with lower socioeconomic status, vegetarian mothers and poor complementary feeding index (p<0.001 for all). The NVBD group also had less number of patients requiring antiseizure medications (ASMs) and hormonal therapy(p<0.001), remained seizure free at six months (p=0.008), lower number of clusters per day (p=0.02) and the number of spasms per clusters at presentation (p=0.03), lower BASED score (p=0.03) and cHPI, dHPI at presentation (p<0.001). All of them remained spasm-free, with normal electroencephalogram at 6-months. Development quotient at baseline, at 6-months, and improvement in development quotient between these two-time points were more in the vitamin B12 deficiency group (p<0.001). All of them had clinical features of pre-ITS (infantile tremor syndrome) or ITS and it was found to be the only independent predictor of NVBD in infants with IESS. Mothers of all these infants had low serum vitamin B12 levels (<200 pg/ml).
Conclusions
Nutritional vitamin B12 deficiency may cause IESS in infants. Hence, vitamin B12 deficiency needs to be ruled out in patients with IESS without any definite etiology.